BLOCKCHAIN FRAMEWORK

The blockchain frameworks are a software solution that simplifies the
development, deployment, and support of technically complex products. Usually,
the framework contains only the blockchain framework and its basic modules, and
all specific components are implemented by the developer based on them. Thereby,
a high development rate is achieved while maintaining the stability and
performance of the final product. 1.Hyperledger: Developer: Linux Foundation   
 Founded: 2016

     Network Type: Public and Private

     Source model: Open Source


In 2016, the Linux Foundation started the Hyperledger project. Hyperledger is
open-source and doesn’t support any cryptocurrency. It was designed as an
environment where different communities and individual developers can meet and
work together on blockchain technologies. The result of this cooperation is a
set of blockchain tools for building financial, healthcare, banking, IoT, supply
chain, and other projects. This project is not one tool but a set of libraries,
instruments, frameworks, and interfaces. The most well-known and commonly used
Hyperledger frameworks are: Hyperledger Sawtooth. Intel has created a blockchain
suite with a modular architecture based on the PoET consensus algorithm.
Hyperledger Iroha. Several Japanese companies cooperated to create this project.
The result is a mobile-oriented blockchain framework that’s easy to implement
into an existing solution. Hyperledger Fabric. Created by IBM, this is the most
famous instrument among all Hyperledger frameworks. Fabric is a great solution
for creating highly scalable apps. Hyperledger Burrow. This tool was designed by
Monax in cooperation with Intel. It operates as a permissioned Ethereum smart
contract blockchain node. 2.Ethereum: Developer: Ethereum Developers

     Founded: 2013

     Network Type: Public and Permissionless

     Source model: Open Source

Founded in late 2013, Ethereum is an open-source and blockchain based
distributed computing platform proposed by Vitalk Buterin, a 22-year old
Russian-Canadian programmer. Ethereum is known for running smart contracts on a
custom-built blockchain. Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) provides the run-time
environment to smart contracts in Ethereum. Every node within the network has to
run an EVM implementation. Though enterprises have adopted Ethereum widely, it
is essential to understand that Ethereum is a public blockchain platform, built
for restricted access versus mass consumption. Moreover, it is the Proof of Work
based platform, which is comparatively slower in terms of speed. But it might
change its consensus algorithm to Proof of Stake in the coming years. Ethereum
has also built a large online support community to keep everyone up-to-date with
product enhancements and updates.

3.Multichain: Developer: Coin Science

     Founded: 2013

     Network Type: Private

     Source model: Open Source

The MultiChain framework belongs to the Coin Science company. This is an
out-of-the-box solution you can apply to build and deploy a private blockchain
for your company or for use by several companies. MultiChain was created to
overcome major obstacles to deploying blockchains in the financial sector. The
framework offers a turnkey package with the necessary privacy and access levels.
For ease of use, MultiChain has a simple API, a command-line interface, and
supports almost all server operating systems. MultiChain is based on the mining
principle and offers privacy and openness with a feature for managing user
permissions. Participants can manage the size of blocks, so there are no
problems with scaling.

4.Eris: Developer: Monax Industries

     Founded: 2014

     Network Type: Permissioned

     Source model: Open Source

Eris is free software that allows anyone to build their own secure, low-cost,
run-anywhere applications using blockchain and smart contract technology.When
using default platform architecture, whether marketplaces, exchanges, government
services, or on-demand commercial services, we wholly rely on a service provider
to manage the business processes required for the system but with Eris,
communities, businesses, governments, and anybody else can use smart contracts
to automate their business processes between organizations. All on their own.It
is a controllable, Proof-of-Stake based blockchain design.

5.R3 Corda: Developer: R3

     Founded: 2015

     Network Type: Permissioned and Private

     Source model: Open Source

Corda is a product of R3. The company wanted to design a framework specifically
for the financial sphere and wanted Corda to work as a mediator and remove
expensive business transactions. The framework allows businesses to reduce
transaction and record-keeping costs and streamline business operations. Corda
is an open-source technology that can be used to store, manage, control, and
synchronize financial obligations between different organizations. It helps
organizations build an open network to transfer value directly with trust. And
you can get it all with complete privacy.

6.OpenChain: Developer: Coinprism

      Founded: 2000

      Network Type: Private

      Source model: Open Source

This framework was launched by Coinprism. It’s designed for issuing and managing
digital assets. The Openchain distributed ledger aims to meet the needs of
banking establishments and financial institutions. Openchain solutions allow
financial establishments to effectively manage all financial processes and
enhance anti-fraud and anti-money laundering systems. It’s a great option if you
need to optimize your organization’s infrastructure and adapt it to different
needs. Openchain relies on a partitioned consensus algorithm where every
instance has only one authority with the right to validate transactions. This
creates a client-server architecture which, as the framework developers claim,
is more reliable than the usual peer-to-peer architecture. The developers also
promise full control over the infrastructure with the required level of
transparency.

7.Exonum: Developer: Bitfury Group

       Founded: 2017

       Network Type: Permissioned and Private

         Source model: Open Source

Exonum is a blockchain framework developed for enterprise projects and launched
in 2017 by the Bitfury Group. The Exonum source code is absolutely open, as are
all application programming interfaces (APIs). Exonum provides access not only
to the whole codebase but to client software for blockchain management. It was
built with the help of Rust, one of the safest and fastest programming
languages. Rust is currently faster than Java, C, C++, and even Go.As a
developer, you can use Exonum to build solutions for FinTech, GovTech,
LegalTech, and many other fields.Exonum avoids the possibility of double-entry
bookkeeping and all sorts of document forgery.

8.Graphene: Developer: Cryptonomex

        Founded: 2012

        Network Type: Public and Private

        Source model: Open Source

Cryptonomex launched the Graphene platform for deploying blockchains. This
framework is mostly written in C++ and has a modular structure which makes it
very adaptable. Initially, Graphene was created as the foundation of Bitshares,
a cryptocurrency exchange. Yet the platform became so popular that it has found
many applications in different areas.Graphene offers a long list of financial
services. And a lot of financial establishments choose Graphene because of its
transparency and reliability.
